feat: contract termination (#25)
eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base/dsp_best_practices: legal/contract-termination.md

# Contract Termination

This document describes how the Dataspace Protocol (DSP) can be used for technically representing contract-related processes such as amendment, termination, and withdrawal.

## Background

To understand the subject under discussion, we need to understand the conflict between technical and business/legal perspectives and the meaning of **contracts** and **policies**.

### Business perspective (Contracts)

> The business ambitions are to comply with legal requirements. Before sharing data, two parties must agree on data sharing conditions (costs, usage conditions, etc.) in form of a **contract**, and both parties have the ability to terminate it any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The business ambitions are to comply with legal requirements. Before sharing data, two parties must agree on data sharing conditions (costs, usage conditions, etc.) in form of a **contract**, and both parties can express their willingness to terminate a contract at any time.
```

Overall, the lifecycle of a contract may include multiple processes (_not necessarily comprehensive_):

| **#** | **Business Process**       | **Details**                                                                                       |
|:------|:---------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1     | Contract Drafting          | Initial drafting and negotiation of terms for data sharing (e.g., define goals, responsibilities) |
| 2     | Contract Review & Approval | Legal, technical, and business review of the contract (e.g., check compliance)                    |
| 3     | Contract Signing           | Formal agreement through signature (e.g., physical signatures, exchange documents)                |
| 4     | Contract Compliance        | Ongoing monitoring of contract adherence (e.g., verify data usage, conduct audits)                |
| 5     | Contract Amendment         | Adjusting the contract for new conditions (e.g., draft and sign amendments)                       |

> | 6     | Contract Termination       | Ending the contract by expiration, termination, or withdrawal (e.g., ensure data deletion)        |

Reviewer: Unsure about 6 & 7 - the difference between termination and withdrawal would be if it is happens prematurely? 

More generally: I'd rather avoid declaring a lifecycle model - likely hinting at it like in line 3 is enough.

| 7     | Contract Withdrawal        | Withdrawing from the contract before full implementation (e.g., notify the other party)           |
| 8     | Dispute Resolution         | Resolving conflicts or disputes during the contract lifecycle (e.g., pursue legal action)         |
| 9     | Archiving                  | Closing the process (e.g., archive documents)                                                     |

### Technical perspective (Policies)

Focusing on the policy part, the DSP contains a technical specification for creating **policies** (policy agreements), along with creating requests, offers, and negotiating these. The policy agreement forms the basis for policy enforcement (access control, compliance checks, etc.) during data handling (transfer, usage, etc.). Thereby, the scope of DSP is to define technical processes for **policies**, not legally binding implications that **contracts** have.

### From contracts to policies

> The mapping of technical processes (policies) and their legal implications (contracts) is done by the dataspace. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mapping of technical processes (policies) and their legal implications (contracts) is done by the [dataspace](https://eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/2025-1/#dfn-dataspace).
```

The evolution from "paper contracts" to technical policies involves multiple stages:

1. **Manual processes**: All processes are performed manually, with no technical support.
2. **Manual processes supported by technical processes**: Manual processes remain dominant, but technical processes are introduced to assist.
3. **Technical processes supported by manual processes**: Technical processes take the lead, with manual intervention only for oversight or exceptions.
4. **Automated technical processes**: Processes are fully automated, requiring minimal or no manual intervention.

Currently, in most dataspaces, the agreed ODRL policies are backed by paper contracts:
- Membership agreements for participating in a dataspace
- Framework agreements for services between two contractual partners
- ...

There, the policies represent parts of the paper contract like contextual attributes (duration, contract reference) or organizational attributes (business partner ID, location of the headquarters, membership status).

> ### Summary

Reviewer: Same criticism as before. I don't think there's value in being this specific - especially in the later stages.

Author: I've shortened this section. As this is a best practices document, I would be in favour of having some additional explaining information - especially as we know the most frequent discussion points. However, I agree that we should not make unnecessary assumptions or statements.

Is the Catena-X example okay?

| 8     | Dispute Resolution         | --                                               | legal/court proceedings                                           |
| 9     | Archiving                  | --                                               | e.g., archive documents                                           | 

## Scenarios & Approaches

There are multiple scenarios why a contract may be terminated or implicitly terminated. In practice, creating an agreement, amendment, termination, or similar produces new documents that are added to the contract process, business relationship, purchasing process, etc. 

As with legal processes, the approach is to create a new policy agreement wherever a new paper document is / would be produced. With this, we aim for a _record of contractual transactions for one dataset_.

* [Non-fulfillment of agreement](#non-fulfillment-of-agreement)
* [Breaches of contract](#breaches-of-contract)
* [Changes to subject of agreement // Contract renewal](#changes-to-subject-of-agreement--contract-renewal)
* [Provider-initiated contract termination](#provider-initiated-contract-termination)
* [Consumer-initiated termination](#consumer-initiated-termination)

> ### Non-fulfillment of agreement

Reviewer: I don't think the best practices should discuss this - feels like shaky terminological and judicial grounds.

The subject of the created agreement was a requirement that is certified by presenting a specific claim (membership). If this requirement is not fulfilled any longer, the requirement is not met.

#### Example
A data usage agreement has been negotiated between two dataspace members. The consumer leaves the dataspace so the provider is no longer obliged to share its data with this consumer. Data access will no longer be granted. 

#### Solution
The agreement does not have to be cancelled or re-negotiated. It is simply no longer fulfilled. No changes to protocols or components are required.

> ### Breaches of contract

Reviewer: I don't think the best practices should discuss this - feels like shaky terminological and judicial grounds.

The contractually agreed terms and conditions are not being complied with.

#### Example
A data usage agreement has been negotiated between two dataspace members. The consumer violates terms of use. The consumer will be prosecuted and data access will no longer be granted.

#### Solution
The agreement does not have to be cancelled or re-negotiated. No changes to protocols or components are required.

> ### Changes to subject of agreement // Contract renewal

Reviewer: I don't think the best practices should discuss this - feels like shaky terminological and judicial grounds.

#### Example
A data usage agreement has been negotiated between two dataspace members. The provider wants to stop the use of a specific dataset. The provider has to actively terminate the contract and data access will no longer be granted.

#### Solution
The negotiation takes place according to DSP Negotiation Protocol. 

1. The Provider sends a `ContractOfferMessage`. 
   - The `prohibition` must target every `action` that has been negotiated before. For example, one prohibition `use` terminates a list of permissions and obligations of type `use`. A prohibition `distribute` terminates the rules of type `distribute` but not every of type or subtype `use`.
   - The `target` refers to the original dataset id.
   - The `constraint` refers to the agreement that is replaced/terminated, in case there are multiple agreements for the same dataset.

 ```json
 {
   "@type": "ContractOfferMessage",
   ...
   "offer": {
     "@type": "Offer",
     "@id": "urn:uuid:d526561f-528e-4d5a-ae12-9a9dd9b7a518",
     "target": "someAssetId",
     "prohibition": [
       {
         "action": "use",
         "constraint": [
           {

>              "leftOperand": "dspace:Agreement",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             "leftOperand": "dspace:agreement",
```
[`odrl:Agreement`](https://[eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/HEAD/message/schema/odrl.jsonld](https://eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/HEAD/message/schema/odrl.jsonld)) is a class and `dspace:Agreement` doesn't exist in the 2025-1 messages. So [`dspace:agreement`](https://[eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/HEAD/message/schema/dspace.jsonld](https://eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/HEAD/message/schema/dspace.jsonld)) is great. This message has to have to have `https://w3id.org/dspace/2025/1/context.jsonld`

             "operand": "eq",
             "rightOperand": "someAgreementId"
           }
         ]
       }
     ]
   },
   "callbackAddress": "https://example.com/callback"
 }
 ```

> 2. The Consumer sends a `ContractNegotiationEventMessage`.

Reviewer 2: What happens when the Consumer doesn't send this accepted message, is the previous contract then still active? And does the provider still needs to provide the data until it has received the accepted message and sent the new agreement message?
For example, if the consumer has a contract to have access to a resource for a certain price, but the provider wants to increase the price. It is questionable whether the provider can or is allowed to terminate the contract.

Reviewer: The DSP doesn't specify a lifecycle of contracts. Same goes for side-effects like dataflows. As a best practice, such dissent about existing contracts should be handled out of band. A constraint may reference a contract which may govern deadlines for ending agreements.

Author: Valid questions, but I agree to Arno. Our goal is to explain how the DSP can be used to technically represent the contract termination process, not what happens when negotiation processes remain incomplete. The same applies to the creation of an Agreement; for example, a provider could never move to `FINALIZED` even though both parties have previously "agreed" and "accepted". I have added your questions to the "further considerations" section.

 ```json
 {
   "@type": "ContractNegotiationEventMessage",
   ...
   "eventType": "ACCEPTED"
 }
 ```

3. The Provider sends a `ContractAgreementMessage`.

 ```json
 {
   "@type": "ContractAgreementMessage",
   ...
   "agreement": {
     "@id": "urn:uuid:e8dc8655-44c2-46ef-b701-4cffdc2faa44",
     "@type": "Agreement",
     "target": "assetId",
     ...
     "prohibition": [
       {
         "action": "use",
         "constraint": [
           {

>              "leftOperand": "dspace:Agreement",

Reviewer: see above

#### Solution
The flow takes place according to DSP Negotiation Protocol.

1. The Consumer sends a `ContractRequestMessage`.
    - The `prohibition` must target every `action` that has been negotiated before. For example, one prohibition `use` terminates a list of permissions and obligations of type `use`. A prohibition `distribute` terminates the rules of type `distribute` but not every of type or subtype `use`.
    - The `target` refers to the original dataset id.
    - The `constraint` refers to the agreement that is replaced/terminated, in case there are multiple agreements for the same dataset.

 ```json
 {
   "@type": "ContractRequestMessage",
   ...
   "offer": {
     "@type": "Offer",
     "@id": "urn:uuid:2828282:3dd1add8-4d2d-569e-d634-8394a8836a89",
     "target": "assetId",
     "prohibition": [
       {
         "action": "use",
         "constraint": [
           {
             "leftOperand": "dspace:Agreement",
             "operand": "eq",
             "rightOperand": "someAgreementId"
           }
         ]
       }
     ]
   },
   "callbackAddress": "https://example.com/callback"
 }
 ```

> 2. The Provider sends a `ContractAgreementMessage`.

Reviewer 2: Similar as above, but in this case the provider might reject the termination since the provider does not agree with the termination.

 ```json
 {
   "@type": "ContractAgreementMessage",
   ...
   "agreement": {
     "@id": "urn:uuid:e8dc8655-44c2-46ef-b701-4cffdc2faa44",
     "@type": "Agreement",
     "target": "assetId",
     ...
     "prohibition": [
       {
         "action": "use",
         "constraint": [
           {

>              "leftOperand": "dspace:Agreement",

Reviewer: see above
